For other uses, see Normalizing constant.
In statistics and applications of statistics, normalization can have a range of meanings.[1] In the simplest cases, normalization of ratings means adjusting values measured on different scales to a notionally common scale, often prior to averaging. In more complicated cases, normalization may refer to more sophisticated adjustments where the intention is to bring the entire probability distributions of adjusted values into alignment. In the case of normalization of scores in educational assessment, there may be an intention to align distributions to a normal distribution. A different approach to normalization of probability distributions is quantile normalization, where the quantiles of the different measures are brought into alignment.

In another usage in statistics, normalization refers to the creation of shifted and scaled versions of statistics, where the intention is that these normalized values allow the comparison of corresponding normalized values for different datasets in a way that eliminates the effects of certain gross influences, as in an anomaly time series. Some types of normalization involve only a rescaling, to arrive at values relative to some size variable. In terms of levels of measurement, such ratios only make sense for ratio measurements (where ratios of measurements are meaningful), not interval measurements (where only distances are meaningful, but not ratios).

In theoretical statistics, parametric normalization can often lead to pivotal quantities – functions whose sampling distribution does not depend on the parameters – and to ancillary statistics – pivotal quantities that can be computed from observations, without knowing parameters.

History
Standard score (Z-score)
See also: Standard score
The concept of normalization emerged alongside the study of the normal distribution by Abraham De Moivre, Pierre-Simon Laplace, and Carl Friedrich Gauss from the 18th to the 19th century. As the name “standard” refers to the particular normal distribution with expectation zero and standard deviation one, that is, the standard normal distribution, normalization, in this case, “standardization”, was then used to refer to the rescaling of any distribution or data set to have mean zero and standard deviation one.[2]

While the study of normal distribution structured the process of standardization, the result of this process, also known as the Z-score, given by the difference between sample value and population mean divided by population standard deviation and measuring the number of standard deviations of a value from its population mean,[3] was not formalized and popularized until Ronald Fisher and Karl Pearson elaborated the concept as part of the broader framework of statistical inference and hypothesis testing[4][5] in the early 20th century.

Student’s t-Statistic
See also: Student's t-Statistic
William Sealy Gosset initiated the adjustment of normal distribution and standard score on small sample size. Educated in Chemistry and Mathematics at Winchester and Oxford, Gosset was employed by Guinness Brewery, the biggest brewer in Ireland back then, and was tasked with precise quality control. It was through small-sample experiments that Gosset discovered that the distribution of the means using small-scaled samples slightly deviated from the distribution of the means using large-scaled samples – the normal distribution – and appeared “taller and narrower” in comparison.[6] This finding was later published in a Guinness internal report titled The application of the “Law of Error” to the work of the brewery and was sent to Karl Pearson for further discussion, which later yielded a formal publishment titled The probable error of a mean in the year of 1908.[7] Under Guinness Brewery’s privacy restrictions, Gosset published the paper under the pseudonym “Student”. Gosset’s work was later enhanced and transformed by Ronald Fisher to the form that is used today,[8] and was, alongside the names “Student’s t distribution” – referring to the adjusted normal distribution Gosset proposed, and “Student’s t-statistic” – referring to the test statistic used in measuring the departure of the estimated value of a parameter from its hypothesized value divided by its standard error, popularized through Fisher’s publishment titled Applications of “Student’s” distribution.[6]

Feature Scaling
See also: Feature scaling
The rise of computers and multivariate statistics in mid-20th century necessitated normalization to process data with different units, hatching feature scaling – a method used to rescale data to a fixed range – like min-max scaling and robust scaling. This modern normalization process especially targeting large-scaled data became more formalized in fields including machine learning, pattern recognition, and neural networks in late 20th century.

The term normal score is used with two different meanings in statistics. One of them relates to creating a single value which can be treated as if it had arisen from a standard normal distribution (zero mean, unit variance). The second one relates to assigning alternative values to data points within a dataset, with the broad intention of creating data values than can be interpreted as being approximations for values that might have been observed had the data arisen from a standard normal distribution.[citation needed]

The first meaning is as an alternative name for the standard score or z score, where values are standardised by subtracting the sample or estimated mean and dividing by the sample or other estimate of the standard deviation. Particularly in applications where the name "normal score" is used, there is usually a presumption that the value can be referred to a table of standard normal probabilities as a means of providing a significance test of some hypothesis, such as a difference in means.[citation needed]

The second meaning of normal score is associated with data values derived from the ranks of the observations within the dataset. A given data point is assigned a value which is either exactly, or an approximation, to the expectation of the order statistic of the same rank in a sample of standard normal random variables of the same size as the observed data set.[1] Thus the meaning of a normal score of this type is essentially the same as a rankit, although the term "rankit" is becoming obsolete. In this case the transformation creates a set of values which is matched in a certain way to what would be expected had the original set of data values arisen from a normal distribution.

Normal distributions are important in statistics and are often used in the natural and social sciences to represent real-valued random variables whose distributions are not known.[5][6] Their importance is partly due to the central limit theorem. It states that the average of many statistically independent samples (observations) of a random variable with finite mean and variance is itself a random variable—whose distribution converges to a normal distribution as the number of samples increases. Therefore, physical quantities that are expected to be the sum of many independent processes, such as measurement errors, often have distributions that are nearly normal.[7]

Moreover, Gaussian distributions have some unique properties that are valuable in analytic studies. For instance, any linear combination of a fixed collection of independent normal deviates is a normal deviate. Many results and methods, such as propagation of uncertainty and least squares[8] parameter fitting, can be derived analytically in explicit form when the relevant variables are normally distributed.

A normal distribution is sometimes informally called a bell curve.[9][10] However, many other distributions are bell-shaped (such as the Cauchy, Student's t, and logistic distributions). (For other names, see Naming.)

The univariate probability distribution is generalized for vectors in the multivariate normal distribution and for matrices in the matrix normal distribution.

In probability theory, a probability density function (PDF), density function, or density of an absolutely continuous random variable, is a function whose value at any given sample (or point) in the sample space (the set of possible values taken by the random variable) can be interpreted as providing a relative likelihood that the value of the random variable would be equal to that sample.[2][3] Probability density is the probability per unit length, in other words. The absolute likelihood for a continuous random variable to take on any particular value is zero, given there is an infinite set of possible values to begin with. Therefore, the value of the PDF at two different samples can be used to infer, in any particular draw of the random variable, how much more likely it is that the random variable would be close to one sample compared to the other sample.

More precisely, the PDF is used to specify the probability of the random variable falling within a particular range of values, as opposed to taking on any one value. This probability is given by the integral of a continuous variable's PDF over that range, where the integral is the nonnegative area under the density function between the lowest and greatest values of the range. The PDF is nonnegative everywhere, and the area under the entire curve is equal to one, such that the probability of the random variable falling within the set of possible values is 100%.

The terms probability distribution function and probability function can also denote the probability density function. However, this use is not standard among probabilists and statisticians. In other sources, "probability distribution function" may be used when the probability distribution is defined as a function over general sets of values or it may refer to the cumulative distribution function (CDF), or it may be a probability mass function (PMF) rather than the density. Density function itself is also used for the probability mass function, leading to further confusion.[4] In general the PMF is used in the context of discrete random variables (random variables that take values on a countable set), while the PDF is used in the context of continuous random variables. Both PMF and PDF are fundamental concepts in statistical inference.

Example

Examples of four continuous probability density functions.
Suppose bacteria of a certain species typically live 20 to 30 hours. The probability that a bacterium lives exactly 5 hours is equal to zero. A lot of bacteria live for approximately 5 hours, but there is no chance that any given bacterium dies at exactly 5.00... hours. However, the probability that the bacterium dies between 5 hours and 5.01 hours is quantifiable. Suppose the answer is 0.02 (i.e., 2%). Then, the probability that the bacterium dies between 5 hours and 5.001 hours should be about 0.002, since this time interval is one-tenth as long as the previous. The probability that the bacterium dies between 5 hours and 5.0001 hours should be about 0.0002, and so on.

In this example, the ratio (probability of dying during an interval) / (duration of the interval) is approximately constant, and equal to 2 per hour (or 2 hour−1). For example, there is 0.02 probability of dying in the 0.01-hour interval between 5 and 5.01 hours, and (0.02 probability / 0.01 hours) = 2 hour−1. This quantity 2 hour−1 is called the probability density for dying at around 5 hours. Therefore, the probability that the bacterium dies at 5 hours can be written as (2 hour−1) dt. This is the probability that the bacterium dies within an infinitesimal window of time around 5 hours, where dt is the duration of this window. For example, the probability that it lives longer than 5 hours, but shorter than (5 hours + 1 nanosecond), is (2 hour−1)×(1 nanosecond) ≈ 6×10−13 (using the unit conversion 3.6×1012 nanoseconds = 1 hour).

There is a probability density function f with f(5 hours) = 2 hour−1. The integral of f over any window of time (not only infinitesimal windows but also large windows) is the probability that the bacterium dies in that window.